Name: 12.pptx
Language: en
Creator: Ania
Creation date: 
Last modification: 2018-01-23
MIME type: application/vnd.openxmlformats-officedocument.presentationml.presentation

1

 2009  CUBED Communications


Date Month Year

BIC and APTIA:
National Industrial Relation Seminar 2015
Richard Clancy, Director Workplace Relations, ACCI

24 March 2015

What does Business want out of IR Reform?


ACCI speaks on behalf of businesses at a national and international level


Productivity Commission Inquiry
The Productivity Commission has noted that:

“[t]he current structure is a product of history and social preferences” and 

it has not been tasked with simply evaluating the current system and considering improvements; such that

The Productivity Commission has correctly described the task before it as going “beyond evaluating the current system to consider the type of system that might best suit the Australian community over the longer term”.

2


ACCI speaks on behalf of businesses at a national and international level
Productivity Commission Inquiry-Goals
Rather than focus on what we have, the Productivity Commission must look for what we need. 

ACCI believes the workplace relations framework should complete the evolution from the centralised system of compulsory conciliation and arbitration of the past. 

It should become a truly decentralised system of collective and individual agreements underpinned by a simple safety net of minimum standards.

ACCI has made 14 broad recommendations
3


ACCI speaks on behalf of businesses at a national and international level
Productivity Commission Inquiry
APTIA Submission
Repeal the Fair Work (Transfer of Business) Amendment Act 2102
ACCI agrees. Those amendments do not represent good policy. 
They have created a disincentive to outsource by locking in public sector terms and conditions of employment, no matter how restrictive, antiquated or expensive they are; and 
They have removed the pressure of credible competition and created a disincentive for public sector reform that may drive efficiency, better services and result in savings for taxpayers

Reduce Red tape flowing from the Fair Work (Registered Organisations) Act 2012
Amend s.90(2)- ACCI has been active in addressing this
Improve s.342 by adding requirement for ‘seriousness’ (ACCI recommendation # 10)
4


ACCI speaks on behalf of businesses at a national and international level
Productivity Commission Inquiry
APTIA Submission
Recognise the impact that industrial action in public transport has on the community by recognising it as an essential service by amending s.424 of the Fair Work Act 2009.

Amend s.437(5) of the Act so that a vote for industrial action is representatives of the views of all employees

Both of these measures warrant serious consideration by the Productivity Commission and are consistent with ACCI recommendations:
to help prevent industrial action in circumstances where claims are not in the public interest via a new “public interest” criteria; and
providing that industrial action cannot be taken unless the union obtains majority support of all workers in circumstances where an employer refuses to bargain
5


ACCI speaks on behalf of businesses at a national and international level
ACCI RECOMMENDATION # 1
1.	A framework with objects that not only protect those in 	employment but help the unemployed and 	underemployed become more competitive in the labour 	market.

With nearly 800,000 Australians unemployed including nearly 300,000 young people, the needs of those seeking to enter the workforce must be considered alongside the needs of employers and people already in work. 

The ultimate goal must be higher levels of participation across the economy

6


ACCI speaks on behalf of businesses at a national and international level
ACCI RECOMMENDATION # 2
A flexible, simple safety net comprising:

A set of legislated minimum standards reflected in a Minimum Conditions of Employment Act (or equivalent).
A national minimum wage and industry rates of pay retained from awards, adjusted annually by the independent wage setting body.
Other award conditions adopted as terms and conditions of employment by agreement. 
A full suite of agreement making options assessed against the legislated minimum standards and applicable industry pay rates retained from awards or the national minimum wage (for those who fall outside award classifications).

7


ACCI speaks on behalf of businesses at a national and international level
ACCI RECOMMENDATION # 3
3.	The safety-net of legislated minimum terms and conditions 	to include:
maximum weekly hours;
requests for flexible working arrangements;
parental leave;
annual leave;
personal carer’s leave and compassionate leave;
community service leave;
long service leave;
public holidays;
notice of termination and redundancy pay;
rest breaks;
minimum wages (including casual loading and piece rates).

8


ACCI speaks on behalf of businesses at a national and international level
Where does this leave Awards?
Parties who use awards will continue to be able to adopt award terms and conditions into agreements.
The framework must better address the needs of small business, which craves a safety net that is simple and easy to follow;
Unsuitable penalty rates are only one example of restrictive aspects of the awards system;
Prescription of ordinary part-time, minimum engagement periods and limitations when it comes to parties agreeing on alternative working patterns of mutual benefit are others; and 
A Fair Work Commission study has concluded that small businesses find awards daunting, convoluted and difficult to use. The Fair Work Ombudsman has conceded the risk of error by employers is still very high.
9


ACCI speaks on behalf of businesses at a national and international level
ACCI RECOMMENDATION # 4
4.	An appropriately balanced national minimum wage and 	compulsory industry rates of pay.
The national minimum wage will remain - $640.90 pw;

It will not be cut;

It will be adjusted annually by an independent body;

Industry rates of pay will be derived from base rates of pay in the 122 modern awards; and

They will also be adjusted annually as per the minimum wage
10


ACCI speaks on behalf of businesses at a national and international level
ACCI RECOMMENDATION # 5
5.	Reform penalty rates.
Currently: Penalty Rates Common Issue in the 4 Yearly review of Modern Awards
Ongoing: Change the Modern Awards Objective s134(1)
The FWC must ensure that modern awards, together with the National Employment Standards, provide a fair and relevant minimum safety net of terms and conditions, taking into account…

(da) the need to provide additional remuneration for:
(i) employees working overtime; or
(ii) employees working unsocial, irregular or unpredictable hours; or
(iii) employees working on weekends or public holidays; or
(iv) employees working shifts; 

11


ACCI speaks on behalf of businesses at a national and international level
ACCI RECOMMENDATION # 5
Why reform penalty rates?
Again, 800,000 Australians unemployed (incl. 300,000 young people). 
No rational basis for labelling ‘unsocial’, trading hours in sectors where businesses are expected to trade and during which employees employed in those sectors expect to and have a desire to work. 
Many service sector industries make a significant contribution to youth employment and the employment of other low—skilled workers. 
They are the first port of call for many young people beginning their working career (e.g. Retail is the major employer of low-skilled, part-time and casual personnel).

12


ACCI speaks on behalf of businesses at a national and international level
ACCI RECOMMENDATION # 5
ACCI expects penalty rates will remain a feature of bargained outcomes. 

In highly coordinated, unionised sectors such as nursing, teaching and emergency services, we expect penalty rates will remain in agreements. 

In other industries, we anticipate payment of a premium may continue to need to be required to attract people to work at certain times. 
13


ACCI speaks on behalf of businesses at a national and international level
ACCI RECOMMENDATION # 6
Include statutory individual agreements as part of a full suite of agreement making options.

A full suite of agreement options:

Registered individual  agreements;
Employer-employee enterprise agreements;
Employer-union enterprise agreements;
Employer greenfield enterprise agreements;
Employer-union greenfield enterprise agreements
14


ACCI speaks on behalf of businesses at a national and international level
ACCI RECOMMENDATION # 7
7.	Simplify the bargaining framework, with:
 
processes that drive cooperative and productive negotiations;

agreement content limited to matters that pertain to the employer/employee relationship; 

sensible limits relating to the taking of industrial action; and

streamlined agreement approval processes.

15


ACCI speaks on behalf of businesses at a national and international level
ACCI RECOMMENDATION #8
8.	Exempt businesses with less than 20 employees from the 	unfair dismissal laws.
The Small Business Fair Dismissal Code (SB Code) is of limited value to small business because reliance upon it is open to challenge, with a small business employer required to provide evidence of compliance with the SB Code if the employee makes a claim for unfair dismissal to the FWC.

There has been a 30 per cent increase in unfair dismissal claims made per annum since the commencement of the FW Act 

About a quarter of unfair dismissal applications conciliated involve a business with less than 20 employees.

16


ACCI speaks on behalf of businesses at a national and international level
ACCI RECOMMENDATION #8
valid reason for termination is easily relegated in importance due to the FW Act’s emphasis on process and the vesting of a broad discretion in the FWC decision makers. 

ACCI does not believe the unfair dismissal processes are delivering a ‘fair go all round’ to both employers and employees.

The broad discretion also results in different decisions being made in applications dealing with similar scenarios thus creating uncertainty for employers.

17


ACCI speaks on behalf of businesses at a national and international level
ACCI RECOMMENDATION #8
‘Go away money’ is an entrenched part of the system. 

Three quarters of matters conciliated settle with a monetary payment

80 per cent of employers influenced by the desire to avoid the cost, time, inconvenience or stress of further legal proceedings in choosing to settle rather than proceeding to an arbitration. 

Cost of managing difficult or poor performing employees

Costs associated in the management of the termination in both contested and uncontested contexts.

18


ACCI speaks on behalf of businesses at a national and international level
ACCI RECOMMENDATION #8
Behavioural economics can impact on the way in which the unfair dismissal laws weigh on employers’ minds. 
The unfair dismissal laws impacts operate to reduce fairness and equity in the following ways:
recruitment and selection decisions are being influenced;
there are certain types of job applicants less likely to be employed;
employees who do not appear to be a good fit with a new employer are more likely to be dismissed during the probationary period;
the laws make it less likely that an SME will hire long-term unemployed candidates; 
the increased formality and written documentation that is required by the laws may disadvantage employees more suited to less formal supervision or who are less literate than average.

19


ACCI speaks on behalf of businesses at a national and international level
ACCI RECOMMENDATION #8
Impact on workforce management and culture:
reduced management authority, 
more time spent in resolving performance issues, 
poor performing employees having a corrosive impact on others 
greater formality leading to difficulties in communication between management and employees.

Prior estimates of impact of unfair dismissal laws:
increased business costs by $1.3 billion per annum (lower bound of estimates) and 
reduced employment by at least 0.46 percent (about 46,000 persons).
20


ACCI speaks on behalf of businesses at a national and international level
ACCI RECOMMENDATION #8
OTHER POSSIBLE REFORMS (20 or more employees)
Make a valid reason a complete defence to an UFD claim. 
Make a complete defence available if an employee was dismissed for the dominant purpose of complying with laws relating to discrimination, sexual harassment, bullying, WHS or any other relevant federal, state or territory law.
Exempt employers where genuine operational reasons. 
If this is not accepted, remove requirement for an employer to consider alternative positions across “associated entities” as part of a “genuine redundancy”.
Reinstatement no longer the primary remedy. Only to be ordered if the employer consents.
higher filing fees, greater access to costs orders or preliminary screening processes designed to filter out speculative claims.
21


ACCI speaks on behalf of businesses at a national and international level
ACCI RECOMMENDATION # 9
Regulate workplace bullying within the WHS framework.
ACCI wants the Anti-Bullying jurisdiction at the FWC repealed:

cost in time and money of managing this exposure, responding to allegations and claims and defending applications (whether or not workplace bullying or meritorious);
possibility of facing multiple investigatory and adjudicative processes arising out of the same set of circumstances; and
possible impact on managerial prerogative including where bullying allegations arise during a performance management process.

ACCI  opposes monetary compensation(532 applications- 1st 9 mths)
22


ACCI speaks on behalf of businesses at a national and international level
ACCI RECOMMENDATION # 10
10.	Restore the longstanding ‘Freedom of Association’ 	protections and unlawful termination protections.

ACCI recommends repeal of the General Protections laws: 
limiting the general protections framework to unlawful termination provisions only;
removing the reverse onus of proof;
reinstating the former, pre-Fair Work Act  ‘Freedom of Association’ protections;
imposing higher barriers to entry such as increased filing fees for applications and caps on compensation.

23


ACCI speaks on behalf of businesses at a national and international level
ACCI RECOMMENDATION # 11
11.	Restore the Office of the Australian Building & Construction 	Commissioner (ABCC) with its full suite of powers.


	A productive, safe and harmonious building and 	construction industry where everybody plays by the rules 
24


ACCI speaks on behalf of businesses at a national and international level
when the ABCC was in place productivity grew by more than 9 per cent, consumers were $7.5 billion better off each year and fewer working days were lost through industrial action.
Two royal commissions have uncovered disturbing evidence of unlawful behaviour and further concerning details continue to be revealed. 
Five-fold increase in prosecutions and a more than doubling in investigations in the past year. 75 CFMEU officials before the courts, facing 403 alleged breaches of workplace laws

24

ACCI RECOMMENDATION # 12
12.	Balanced right of entry laws.
Despite promising to ‘maintain the existing right of entry rules’ prior to its election in 2007, the previous Government extended them.
ACCI believes that such entry for discussion purposes should be conditional on the workplace at least having union members who actually invite the union to enter.

The Act currently prevents an employer resisting a union demand to meet employees in the lunchroom

Difficult for employers to dispute frequency of entry.

Passage of current Government’s  Fair Work Amendment Bill 2014 would assist.
25


ACCI speaks on behalf of businesses at a national and international level
ACCI RECOMMENDATION # 13
13.	Restore balance to transfer of business rules.
ACCI seeks the former longstanding provisions under the Workplace Relations Act 1996 and there should be a maximum time limit for transferring industrial instruments.

Real question is whether the ‘protections’ under the new regime justify the costs to the economy. The rules:
unduly restrict the capacity of employers to restructure their businesses.
create a disincentive to outsource and for entrepreneurs to offer better ways of doing things to the market.
lock in of public sector terms and conditions of employment so as to remove or lessen the effective competition.
26


ACCI speaks on behalf of businesses at a national and international level
ACCI RECOMMENDATION # 14
14.	Recognise the right to engage in contracting and labour 	hire arrangements
Evidence of a widespread problem of illegitimate use of subcontracting arrangements which would warrant changes to the sham contracting provisions within the Act is lacking. 

Rather, the framework intrudes upon the common law right to be or use an independent contractor (e.g. terms in enterprise agreements that would restrict the use of contractors).

The framework must facilitate the broadest possible range of options for workforce participation to meet our diverse workforce needs.
27


ACCI speaks on behalf of businesses at a national and international level
CONCLUSION
Original system of Conciliation and Arbitration:
“In no sense is this a triumph for humanity. It is a confession that the ordinary rules have failed, and that we have to grope about for some method which is clumsy, and perhaps, inequitable…trusting that the time will come when, under a more rational and voluntary arrangement of intelligent men representing these great interests, a method will be found of settling their disputes without any recourse to legal machinery”.
	(Sir George Reid, Hansard, House of Representatives, 1901-1904, p. 2862)

110 years on, are we not still waiting and are we any closer to a simpler system?

Fair Work Act- 950 Sections, 208,000 words
122 Modern Awards with over 2 million words


28


ACCI speaks on behalf of businesses at a national and international level
ACCI’S  VISION
To meet the challenges of the future, the workplace relations framework must be pro-employment, small-business friendly, responsive to changing domestic and international conditions and receptive to the needs of the unemployed and underemployed.

ACCI and its members have long held a vision for:

A workplace relations framework that empowers employers and employees across the nation to work co-operatively and make decisions in their shared interests that lead to more jobs, higher living standards and a better future.
			THANK YOU!

29


ACCI speaks on behalf of businesses at a national and international level

