Name: 162.144.95.10_~sjsauburn_wp-content_uploads_2016_08_student-handbook-2016-2017.doc
Language: en
Creator: MaryEllen Botsford
Creation date: 2016-08-01
Last modification: 2016-08-10
MIME type: application/msword

SCHOOL ROUTINE


1. SCHOOL TELEPHONE/FAX NUMBER 



School Office

315-253-8327



Fax

            315-253-2401



Web Site

http://schools.dor.org/stjoauburn



Email

   
ElementarySchoolAuburnSt.Joseph/Schools/Dioceseof






Rochester@DOR


2. SCHOOL HOURS



8:30 a.m. First Bell Rings for K-8, Students Proceed to Classrooms

	    8:30 a.m. – Pre-K Begins

  11:30 a.m. – Pre-K Dismissal
    2:30 p.m. – Pre-K F Dismissal     






8:40 a.m. - School Begins K-8                   



10:49 a.m. – K-2 Lunch                        



11:30 p.m. – PK & 3-5 Lunch                               


12:11 a.m. – 6-8 Lunch 


 

 2:45 p.m. - K Dismissal

 2:54 p.m. - Gr. 1-5 Dismissal

 2:54 p.m. – Gr. 6-8 Dismissal

Note: Children who walk to school, or are driven by parents are asked not to arrive before 
8:30 a.m., unless specific permission has been sought and granted by the principal.

Special Drop Off/Pick Up Notes:

· Parents who drive children to school are asked to come into the front parking lot on the right side of the school sign, proceed to the statue garden, make a left and then drop off by the back gym door.  Then proceed to the left and out of the parking lot. 

· Parents are asked to refrain from parking on Lawton Avenue before or after school.  This is at the direction of the Police and Fire Departments.  
· At arrival, bus students will enter through the gym doorways and proceed to their classrooms.

· Parents who park in the lot on Genesee are asked NOT to park in the three rows nearest the shrine to facilitate those who are just dropping children off for school.  (PLEASE FOLLOW ARROWS)
· At dismissal, Bus Pupils will be dismissed through the door facing Lawton Avenue.  

· Walkers will be dismissed through the doors facing Genesee St.  

· Students whose parents will pick them up by car will be dismissed through the door facing Genesee Street.  

            At dismissal, PLEASE DO NOT turn left (east) from the Genesee Street parking lot.

3. ATTENDANCE/ABSENCE
Regular attendance is essential to success in school. A student not only misses work on the day of his or her absence but also is usually unprepared the following day because they miss instructions for the new work.  This applies to the children in all the grades.  Regular attendance for the children in Kindergarten and Pre-K is just as important as it is for those students in the Eighth Grade.  According to New York State Law, your child is required to attend school every day.  On each day a student is absent from school for illness or any other reason, a parent should call the school between 8:00 am and 9:00 am.  A message may be left 253-8327.  All absences must have a written note, with date and signature, upon return to school.  The only legal excuses for absence or tardiness under education laws are: 

1. Sickness

2. Sickness or death in the family
3. Impassable roads or weather making travel unsafe
4. Religious observance
5. Approved school supervised trips
6. Required presence in court
Any other absence will be marked as an illegal absence.  Doctor and Dental appointments should be made either before school begins or after dismissal, if possible.  If the student is to be dismissed at a time other than our regular dismissal time, a written request must be sent into school stating the child’s name, reason for dismissal, date and time of dismissal, as well as the name of the person picking up the student.
Phone calls should be made to notify the school of a late arrival for a doctor or dentist appointment.  A note may also be sent the day before an appointment.  A student who arrives late must report to the school office before going to their room. 

If your child is sent home from school due to illness, then it may be appropriate to keep them home for at least the next day, maybe longer depending upon the illness.  The following guidelines should be followed:

You should not have your child return to school if he/she has:

1. Fever in the past 24 hours

2. Vomiting and Diarrhea in the past 24 hours

3. Chills

4. Sort throat

5. Bad cold-with runny nose or bad cough

6. Any illness that has kept your child awake during the night

7. Any rash, unless your child has been seen by your doctor and your doctor has written a note stating that your child may attend school.

8. An untreated case of head lice. (You must accompany your child to the health office to be checked if he/she has gone home with a case of head lice.)

Students who will be absent for an extended period (e.g. one week) may request assignments in advance.  At least 24 hours notice must be given. Teachers may use their discretion at providing assignments for vacation periods.

If you would like to request work for your child to be picked up the day they are absent, please call the office BEFORE 9:00 a.m. to request work missed for that day.

Tardiness:

The school day starts at 8:40 a.m.  Children should be in their classrooms at this time so that they will be ready to start the school day with the rest of the class.  Children who are tardy (those arriving after 8:40 a.m.) must have a written excuse unless they are late due to a bus problem.  They must also be signed in at the front office by a parent.  Continual tardiness will jeopardize Perfect Attendance Awards.
4. EMERGENCY SCHOOL CLOSINGS
St. Joseph School will be closed when the Auburn Schools are closed for inclement 

Weather.
We will have our school name listed.  It would be very unlikely that St. Joseph School would close unless the public school districts closed or we had an emergency. You are encouraged to listen to WAUB or WSYR radio or watch television stations WSTM-Ch.3, WIXT-Ch. 9 and WTVH-Ch.5.   

Please do not call the school.  Subscribe to WSYR text notification system.  Please see the WSYR website.
5. TRANSPORTATION
We ask that you notify the school of any special circumstances regarding transportation of your child.  This would include any changes in pick-up or drop-off points, whether temporary or permanent:

a. For a one-day occurrence, a note from you, which needs principal’s approval, will enable us to assist your child in finding the correct bus. 

b. For a temporary change of a week or longer, please send written notice of the change to your local transportation office and a copy to the school office.

c. If the change is permanent--you are moving or making other child care plans for example, please notify the local transportation office and the school at least one week in advance of the change.

d. Please notify the school of the special arrangements that should be made for your children in the event of an emergency early dismissal. 

e. Questions regarding student busing can only be answered by the transportation office in your local school system.  Any questions or concerns should be directed to them.

     District Transportation Phone Numbers

Auburn

252-3401


Auburn Garage
255-5847


Jordan-Elbridge
689-8500

Moravia

497-2670


Port Byron

776-5508


Skaneateles

291-2270

Southern Cayuga
364-8652


Union Springs

889-5036


Weedsport

834-9760

Regardless of the district in which you reside, your transportation department has rules of conduct designed to insure the safe transport of all students.  These rules are enforced by the transportation departments and supported by the school. 

Below is a list of rules representative of all the districts:

1. Respect the property and personal rights of others.

2. Ride only the vehicle that has been assigned to you.

3. Board your vehicle in an orderly manner; do not push other students.    Wait at the stop for a signal from the driver before you cross the street.

4. For reasons of safety, you must remain in your seat while the vehicle is in motion.  

5. The driver must be able to hear as well as to see danger.  Any serious disruption of the normal orderly operation of school transportation vehicles; or any act which seriously endangers, or threatens to endanger the health, safety, welfare or morals of others will not be permitted. 

6. Fighting will not be allowed on the vehicle.

7. If the vehicle driver permits open windows, keep your arms and head inside and don’t  throw objects out of windows.

8. Smoking, eating, drinking of any beverage is not permitted on the vehicle.

9. Any student found to have in his or her possession sharp instruments, tools, or weapons of any kind will be immediately suspended from transportation and referred for long- term suspension. 

Emergency Contacts:

Only those persons whose names and telephone numbers have been provided to the school will be permitted to take the children from the school.  Please keep this list updated as necessary.
Persons on this list who are not personally known to the school staff will be permitted to take the students from school only after providing appropriate identification.

Custody:
St. Joseph School assumes that both parents are the custodial and residential parents.  When this is not the case, the school must receive documentation of parental custody.  This may be obtained by receiving a certified copy of that section of the separation agreement, a Family Court Document, which states custodial and residential parents.  A statement of custody and residence extracted from the separation of divorce decree may be accepted if it is on attorney’s stationery and signed by the attorney.  The residential parent should sign documents such as field trip permission slips, etc.

NOTE: WITHOUT A NOTE, 

YOUR CHILD WILL GO HOME ON THE REGULAR BUS.
6.  TUITION

As a private school it is necessary that tuition be charged.  Families that are not a registered member of a Catholic Parish will pay a higher tuition rate.  With the registration forms a Parish Commitment form signed by your pastor must be submitted to verify your membership in a catholic parish.

The school requires that all families register for an account with FACTS and that tuition be current before a student is accepted for re-registration for the fall or before transferring to another school. 

7.  VOLUNTEERS  

To help make up the difference in the actual cost of educating a child and the amount of tuition collected, adult volunteers are necessary to the school’s operation.  Parents are highly encouraged to volunteer during the school day or to help with school events and fundraisers.  Please contact the principal to find out more about volunteering at St. Joseph School.  

Creating a Safe Environment/Safe and Sacred Class  - The Charter for the Protection of Children and Young People, developed by the United States Bishops in November 2002, called upon each diocese to develop comprehensive policies to ensure a safe environment for all young people within our care.  The Diocese of Rochester has responded by mandating screening and training of all individuals, current or future, paid or volunteer, whose duties put them in direct contact with persons under the age of 18 or vulnerable adults.  To volunteer in our classrooms, cafeteria, library or help chaperone field trips, work Bingo, Spring Bazaar, etc., adults must have completed Creating a Safe Environment/Safe and Sacred Course, signed a Code of Conduct form and have had a background check completed.  To drive on school field trips, license checks are also required. You may go to www.safeandsacred-dor.org to create an account, complete training and print your certificate of completion.  Please then bring this to the main office.
 8. SCHOOL VISITS – ALL VISITORS, INCLUDING PARENTS
· All must report to the School Office upon arrival at school.  No one should go directly to any classroom or the nurse’s office.  For security reasons we need to know who is in the building, for smooth operating reasons we need to minimize interruptions in classrooms.  Thank you in advance for your cooperation.

· Lunches, messages, and forgotten items may be left at the School Office. They should be clearly marked with your child’s name and homeroom.   We will be happy to deliver them.

· Parents are very welcome to attend any events which occur at our school.  Your participation and interest are important and appreciated.

· Parents wishing to see the principal are asked to please call ahead to be certain that she is available.  She will be glad to set up an appointment at a convenient time.

· Parents wishing to see a teacher are asked to call the school to request an appointment.  The request will be forwarded to the teacher.


9. DRESS CODE 

In rare cases a student may need to attend school while out of the dress code.  A written excuse must be presented to the teacher if the student is out of uniform.  Please see that the uniform is kept neat and clean.  Uniforms are worn daily between September and June.

BOYS UNIFORM:  Kindergarten – 8th Grade


             Pants:  Navy Blue Twill pants, purchased from Land’s End.

Pants must be worn with a belt, if there are belt loops.

Shirts: White or hunter green long or short-sleeved polo shirts, with logo, purchased from Land’s End.

Shoes: Brown or black leather shoes – no work boots, no sandals, no sneakers

Shoes must be tied properly at all times.

Socks: must cover the ankle.

Sweater:  Navy blue V-neck or school fleece jacket.  
GIRLS UNIFORM:  Kindergarten – 8th Grade

· K – 4 girls -- Jumper – school plaid purchased from Land’s End. 

· 5 – 8 students -- Skirt – school plaid purchased from Land’s End.

· Blouses: white oxford cloth, button down collars long or short sleeves, no round collared or other white shirts permitted.

· Shoes:  navy, brown or black shoes with low heels – no sandals, backless shoes or clogs, no sneakers.

        (Heels should not be higher than 1 1/2 inches for safety on stairs and recess.)

· Socks – Navy blue knee socks or tights.

· Sweater: Navy blue cardigan or school fleece jacket. 
· Pants – Khaki or Navy Land’s End pants may be worn, with Blouses (as above) or white long or short sleeve polo shirts.

WARM WEATHER UNIFORM:  Boys and Girls

· Uniform shorts – Khaki or navy twill purchased from Land’s End may be worn from September 1- October 15 and from May 15 – end of the year.

· The knit polo shirt is to be worn with the shorts, either white or green.

· Shoes and ankle socks and belt rules remain the same.

MISCELLANEOUS:

·            All shirts and blouses are to be tucked in (not folded under) at all times

·            Girl’s skirts and jumpers are to be hemmed at the knee.  Skirts are not to be

                  rolled up at the waist

·            Shoes that are tie-shoes must be tied at all times.

·            Jewelry is to be minimal – a watch, religious medal, and for girls, simple stud earrings 

                  are acceptable. (Boys – no earrings)

·      Shaved heads, colored or bleached hair, tattoos and body piercing are not permitted.
· Minimal and appropriate makeup for girls may be worn.

GYM UNIFORM:

· Grades 4-8, Land’s End gym uniform shorts and shirts are required for boys and girls.

· Tied sneakers  (Sneakers are worn only during Physical Education class) 

Non-Uniform Days

From time to time, students will have the privilege of “dressing out” for school.  There are several rules around these special days.  These are as follows:

1. Students will come to school in appropriate clothing.  Items, which are ripped or torn or not clean, are unacceptable.  Note:  When shorts are allowed they must be at the knee! (walking/bermuda style)
2. Jeans and sneakers may be worn on a dress down day.  Note: No backless shoes, sandals or flip flops may be worn for safety reasons.

3. Unless specifically mentioned – hats may not be worn in school.

4. Shirts may not have messages which are offensive or violent.  Please remember that when you wear any shirt with an advertising message, you are endorsing the product.  Advertising for tobacco or alcohol products is unacceptable in our school.

5. If anyone has a doubt about the acceptance of any article of clothing, it is recommended that you bring an alternative; e.g. another shirt.

6. If there is a special dress day, students must comply with the directions, or wear their regular uniform, e.g. wearing of green on St. Patrick’s Day.

7. The Principal’s decision on appropriate dress will be final.

8. No dress out passes will be allowed on the following occasions:

· Days when we are going to Church

· Days when we have a special assembly or speaker

· Days when we are going on field trips – unless specifically announced.

Note:  These rules apply for Birthday Casual Day Certificates 





(given on the student’s birthday and to be used on the day of 

 their choosing) as well as for any other dress out occasions.

Miscellaneous

· Visible piercing of body parts other than the ear lobe is not permitted.

· Visible (while wearing gym attire or uniforms) tattoos are not permitted.

· Extreme hairstyles, e.g. shaved heads, or hair color, e.g. blue, orange or excessively bleached, will not be permitted.  Dyed hair must be a NATURAL color.
· No cologne, perfume, body spray, etc. 

NOTE: Uniform infractions will receive one warning.  After that,

recess detention will be the usual consequence.

The Principal has final approval regarding appropriate uniform attire.
10. LUNCH PROGRAM:
    There is a Hot Lunch Program available at the St. Joseph School.
· Lunch may be ordered daily.

· Lunch MUST be paid for through your FACTS account.

· Students may bring their own lunch HOWEVER no soda.
· Also, McDonalds, etc. is not encouraged except for EXTRAORDINARY CIRCUMSTANCES.
· Milk may be purchased daily.

· Parents may apply for free and reduced price lunch and milk. The forms are available in the school office.

               Lunch/Recess Hours 


Grades K-2  -     10:49 am - 11:29 am



Lunch -   10:49 am - 11:09 am



Recess -  11:09 am - 11:29 am
  


Grades PK,3-5-  11:30 am -  12:10  pm

                        
Lunch -   11:30 am – 11:50  am

                 

Recess -  11:50 am - 12:10 pm


Grades 6-8 -        12:11 am -  12:51 pm



Lunch -    12:11 am – 12:31 pm
        

Recess -   12:31 am – 12:51 pm

Lunch/Recess Behavior

Lunchroom:

· Students are expected to sit appropriately at tables in the lunchroom until dismissal for recess.

· Students will raise their hand for permission to leave their seat.

· There will be no throwing of food or any objects in the lunchroom or throughout the school.

· Students are responsible for clearing their place when finished eating.

· Students will enter and leave the lunchroom in an orderly manner.

Recess:

· Students will go outside every day, weather permitting. They are to be dressed for that possibility.  Winter recess attire for K-5 includes boots, hats, mittens.  Snow pants K-3 to play in the yard when there is snow on the ground.

· Students will comply with all directions regarding play areas and restrictions.

· If it is raining, very cold, or some other adverse condition exists, students will need to stay inside and will be supervised either in the gym or in a classroom.  At times, the principal may allow students to choose whether or not they wish to go outside.  

General Lunchroom Understandings 

· The Lunch Supervisors have been chosen and prepared for this job by the principal.

· They have the same responsibility and authority as a teacher.

· They are deserving of the same respect as a teacher.

· Disrespect will not be tolerated and will receive a consequence.

· Fighting is forbidden at lunch and will be punished as it would at any other time of day.

· Teasing, bullying or harassing behavior of any kind is also intolerable and will have a consequence. See the section in Harassment and Sexual Harassment under the Discipline Policy. 

School Parties:

All parties should be cleared through the homeroom teacher and principal.  Teachers will communicate with parents about their needs for holiday parties.  Students are allowed to bring in a birthday treat for their classmates, but arrangements must be made with the classroom teacher before the treat is brought into school.  It is important to remember that only a small treat should be sent to school along with all the necessary paper supplies to consume the treat (napkins, etc.)

Party Invitations:

Birthday party invitations may be given out in school  ONLY under the following conditions:

· Girls:  an invitation is being given to ALL the girls in the class or to ALL girls and boys.

· Boys: an invitation is being given to ALL the boys in the class or to ALL boys and girls.

If a child comes to school with an invitation for SOME of the girls and/or SOME of the boys, we will NOT allow the invitations to be handed out.

11. MEDICAL

    State Law prohibits school Nurses from administering medication to school children    

    without specific written authorization from parents and the family doctor.

    This applies to prescription drugs and over-the-counter items such as cough drops, aspirin,

    eye drops, etc.  If parents expect a medication to be given to a child during the hours he/she 

    is in school, the following requirements must be met in each specific case of treatment.

1. From the physician, a written request indicating frequency and dosage 

                              of the prescribed medication.   

2. From the parent, a written request to administer the medication as specified

                              by the doctor.   

3. By the parent, responsibility for delivery of the medication to the School Nurse or School Office in the original pharmacy container, not in a student’s backpack.

4. Parent must sign self directed form.

Authorization as described above does not carry over from one year to the next.  It must be updated at the start of each school year.           
  Medications which are sent to school without the proper authorization will not be given to the 

  student and will be returned to the parent.


 NOTE:  It is often easier to adjust the timing of the medication in instances where a

               prescription is to be given for a short time.
Example, antibiotic 3x/day can be given                          


before, after school and at bedtime.

Student Physicals:

Annual physicals are required by the New York State Education Department for all children in Grades Pre-K, K, 2, 4, 7.  Students in grades 7 and 8 that will be participating in sports must have a current physical form on file in the school health office.

12.  PHYSICAL EDUCATION
      Physical Education is mandated by the state.  All students are to participate in gym classes and 

      no one will be excused without a written notice.  Children who forget their sneakers or appropriate 
      attire will not be permitted to participate.  This will affect your child’s grade. 

13. LIBRARY  

     All students will be encouraged to check out library books and other materials.  Students

     will not be fined for overdue material, although please help your child start the habit of

     returning items on time.  We will expect any damage or lost material to be replaced.

14. TELEPHONES

· It is NOT our policy to call parents for forgotten items, permission slips, lunches and transportation changes.  We wish to help students be responsible for these things.

· Calls will be made ONLY for emergencies.

· Calls to report a student illness or accident will be made to parents by the Principal,

teacher, office administrator, or school nurse ONLY.

· Telephone messages will be relayed to students only in case of emergency, and will be delivered at 11:00 am and 2:00 pm.

· No student may have a cell phone, pager or beeper turned on in school at any time.  It is preferable that they be left at home.   If there is a special need to carry one, it is to be turned off and kept in the child’s book bag in their locker.  The school is not responsible for these items should they become lost.

15. STUDENTS ON PREMISES

1. Once a student arrives at school, they may not leave the premises at any time,

                             except with their parent, or parent designee. 

2. Parents must come into the school office to sign a student out and/or in prior to dismissal. No student may leave the school to join someone in an automobile during regular school hours. 

3. Parents do need to sign a student in who is late or returning to school from an appointment (Grades K-8).  

4. Any student who rides the bus to school is expected to ride their bus home, unless we have written permission from the parent or guardian to allow otherwise.  This includes riding your own or another bus to another destination. 
5. Please call the school in the event of an emergency change of dismissal for that day.  We make exceptions for emergencies, but ask that you limit those calls.

6. Students may be dismissed to persons identified by the parent on the school information card.  If these persons change, the parent must notify the school before the child needs to be picked up.
16. MISCELLANEOUS

1. All personal items should be labeled.  This includes clothing, particularly gym clothing.  Our school is not responsible for lost or damaged items.

2. Student visitors are not ordinarily permitted.  Any student visitor must be 

approved and written permission given, by the Principal only, 2 days before the visit.


3. No electronic entertainment devices such as, but not limited to, Ipod, MP3 player, Ipod, DS, game boys, beepers/pagers, are permitted to be in use at school.  We discourage students from bringing collectibles of value to school.  If a student brings such items they are completely responsible for their safety.

The school will accept no responsibility for these objects.

4.   We discourage students from bringing money other than lunch money to school.  The only items available for purchase here are tablets, milk and lunch.  (Snack Shack is occasionally operated by the 8th grade.)  Occasionally, there are bake sales or raffles, but these are well publicized ahead of time.

17.  ACADEMIC  PROCEDURES
1. HOMEWORK POLICY
Homework is an integral part of the school process.  It should provide the following:

· reinforcement of classroom learning

· opportunity for independent and responsible behavior

· an element of success for the child

A.  At St. Joseph School, the following policy regarding homework    

      is in effect:


1.  Homework is to be completed in a neat and thorough manner.


2.  Students will be expected to produce the work for review in class, class


     collection, pop quizzes, or regularly scheduled homework quizzes.


3.  Satisfactory completion of homework assignments will be one dimension of


     the grades on the report card.

B.  Suggestions to help your child with homework:


1.  Provide a quiet area, free from distraction for your child to use to do


     homework.


2.  Inquire about assignments.  

            3.  Review completed work with your child.  Students may make mistakes, but that is part of the 


      learning process.

C.  Homework includes both written and study assignments. 

1. The general guideline for homework is 10 minutes times the grade.  For example, Grade 3 could be given an assignment that would take an average of 30 minutes, and Grade 6 given one hour of homework.  Even with study time, it would be unlikely that a student would get all their work done during the school day.  They may always review notes from their classes.

2. Homework is not usually given on a weekend.  Regular homework will be assigned Monday thru Thursday, unless extra time is needed to complete a project or catch up because of a missed school day.  No homework will be assigned Friday to Sunday.

3. Normally, tests are not given on a Monday.

2. ASSESSMENT
The purposes of classroom testing are to

1. Find out whether objective of a unit or lesson have been accomplished.

a.  determine what students have or have not learned

b.  determine effectiveness of methods employed by the teachers

2. Assist the student to organize ideas and work by improving study skills.

3. Challenge the student to utilize the knowledge he/she has learned in new applications.

4. Help the school evaluate programs.

According to the subject matter and objectives, tests will be given at the conclusion of a unit.   Short quizzes, oral or written, may be given within a unit to check a student’s progress.

The testing program at St. Joseph includes:

A.  Unit Tests

     Grades 3-8 conduct frequent classroom testing in Religion, Language Arts,


     Science, Social Studies, Mathematics and Spelling.


     Unit tests contain both objective and essay type questions.  After tests have


     been administered, the teacher will return and review these with students 


     within a reasonable time.


     Often test papers will be sent home for a parent signature.  This will not only

   
     inform you of your child's progress, but will assure the teacher that you're


     aware of your child's effort and achievement.

B   Exam Absence
Generally, students absent on an exam day are required to make up the missed exam as soon as it is feasibly possible.  If arrangements cannot be made for a student to take a missed exam within a reasonable time, the semester grade will be determined based upon two marking periods, reflecting the fact that the exam was not taken.

C. Testing Violations
A student will have a test or exam invalidated (seen as a Failure) if in the opinion of the teacher there was an attempt to bring, give or receive any information pertinent to the test or exam.


 E.  New York State Tests

St. Joseph School will participate in the following tests are given throughout the school year

	Grades
	Subject Area
	Time of Year

	3-8
	English Language Arts
	April

	3-8
	Mathematics
	May

	4 & 8
	Science – written and performance test
	May/June


· Each test measures the work of several grades.  Tests, which are given in 4th or 5th Grade, cover material presented in K-4/5.  Tests, which are given in 8th Grade, assess material presented in Grades 5-8.

· These tests will NOT impact students’ grades.  Effort is encouraged and appreciated as we use these as one point of assessment.   

· Faculty will encourage good assessment strategies for ALL work completion not just NYS tests.  These may include eating regular/healthy meals, getting scheduled quality sleep, reviewing materials and employing good test taking strategies.

· Undue stress and anxiety are discouraged and actively combatted.  

3. ACCEPTANCE OF STUDENT WORK

A uniform heading is to be used in grades 3-8.  This should include subject, grade, school, student name and date.

All assignments and/or class work should be done with quality handwriting.  Unacceptable work must be done again.

Answers should be written in complete sentences.  Excessive crossing out should be avoided.
    Note:  Teachers will reference the Diocese of Rochester SHAPE 2000 and beyond

4.  PROGRESS REPORTS
A progress report is simply a written account of the student’s work for that period of the year.  Parents and students should not be surprised by the report, as there are many opportunities to share information before the report card date.  Parents should have a sense of progress from student classwork, tests and quizzes and teacher comments or conferences.

Guidelines For Progress Reports

All schools in the Diocese of Rochester are required to report student progress to parents/guardians four times each school year through use of the standard Diocesan Progress Report Card.  Each school is expected to schedule and publish a calendar for distributing Progress report Cards.  The Progress Report Card establishes regular communication between the school and parent/guardian about a pupil’s academic achievement. 

The Diocesan Progress Report Card does not exclude other means of reporting student progress such as written and phone contact, parent-teacher conferences, bi-weekly progress reports, interim reports (five week communications), and the like.

PRIMARY GRADES – K-3
In Grades K-3, emphasis is placed on individual as well as age-appropriate development.  The learning environment provides experiences which enrich all aspects of a child’s life.  Curriculum content is designed to be integrated and sequential.  Teachers determine a Progress Report marking code by multiple means of assessment.

Progress Report cards are to be distributed at each of the four marking periods for grades K-3.

MARKING CODE – GRADES  K-3
Major Content Areas

LEVEL 4:

Demonstrates a thorough understanding of subject matter.  Evidence of student achievement in classwork, homework, and assessments meets and exceeds NYS and Diocesan standards.

LEVEL 3:

Demonstrates a clear understanding of subject matter.  Evidence of student achievement in classwork, homework, and assessments meets NYS and Diocesan standards.

LEVEL 2:

Demonstrates a partial understanding of subject matter.  Evidence of student achievement in classwork, homework, and assessments does not always meet NYS and Diocesan standards.

LEVEL 1:

Does not demonstrate an understanding of subject matter. Evidence of student achievement in classwork, homework, and assessments does not meet NYS and Diocesan standards
PROGRESS CODE – GRADES K-3
Subcategories, Special Subject Areas and Personal Progress

+
Outstanding


Satisfactory

N
Needs Improvement

I
Improving

X
Not evaluated at this time

GRADES 4-6

In Grades 4-6, the grade given on the report card for each marking period is the combined average of a student’s achievement in three areas of learning:


Classwork:
guided practice, independent and cooperative learning, participation


Testing:
tests, quizzes, projects, presentations


Homework:
homework, home-study skills

Teachers must balance classwork, testing, and homework in an age/grade appropriate manner when determining a Progress Report Card grade.

MARKING CODE – GRADES 4-6   

Major Content Areas and Special Subject Areas

A

95-100

Excellent:  indicates superior performance, initiative, and 





 
      independence in academic study.


B+

90-94

Very Good:  indicates commendable performance in academic 





                    study.

B

85-89

Good:   indicates above average performance in academic 





             study.

C+

80-84

Very Satisfactory:  indicates a tendency toward above average







       performance in academic study.

C

75-79

Satisfactory:  indicates average performance in academic study.

D

70-74

Unsatisfactory:  indicates weakness and difficulty in the

                            


  
   understanding of content and the academic study.

F

Below 70
Failure:  indicates a marked lack of understanding of content and 

                   



   ability to apply skills in a subject area.

The passing grade for subjects in Grades 4-6 is 70% (D).

PROGRESS CODE – GRADES 4-6

Subcategories and Personal Growth and Work Habits

+
Outstanding


Satisfactory

N
Needs Improvement

I
Improving

X
Not evaluated at this time

Grades 7-8
In Grades 7-8, the grade given on the report card for each marking period is the combined average of a student’s achievement in three areas of learning:


Classwork:
guided practice, independent and cooperative learning, participation


Testing:
test, quizzes, projects, presentations


Homework:
homework, home-study skills

Teachers must balance classwork, testing, and homework in an appropriate manner when determining a Progress Report Card grade.

MARKING CODE – GRADES 7-8
Major Content Areas and Special Subject Areas

 

95-100

Excellent:  indicates superior performance, initiative, and 





 
      independence in academic study.




90-94

Very Good:  indicates commendable performance in academic 





                    study.



85-89

Good:   indicates above average performance in academic study.



80-84

Very Satisfactory:  indicates a tendency toward above average







       performance in academic study.



75-79

Satisfactory:  indicates average performance in academic study.



70-74

Below Satisfactory:  indicates some weakness in academic study.



65-69

Unsatisfactory:  indicates weakness and difficulty in the

 





   understanding of content and the application







   of skills in academic study.

F

Below 65
Failure:  indicates a marked lack of understanding of content and






   ability to apply skills in a subject area.

The passing grade for subjects in Grades 7-8 is 65% (D).

PROGRESS CODE – GRADES 7-8

Subcategories and Personal Growth and work Habits.

+
Outstanding


Satisfactory

N
Needs Improvement

I
Improving

X
Not evaluated at this time

DETERMINING MARKING CODE FOR SPECIAL SUBJECT AREAS

Art, Computer Technology, Music and Physical Education

Certain subjects are taught once or twice a week such as Art, Music, Physical Education, and Computer Technology.  Emphasis is placed on participation, class performance, independent and cooperative learning.

Multiple forms of assessment, appropriate for the particular subject area, age, and grade, should be used to determine the Progress Report marking code.

In order to provide adequate class time for assessment of student achievement, special subjects are graded on the Progress Report card at the end of the second and fourth marking periods.  The final grade for special subjects in Grades 3-8 is the average of first and second semester achievement.

Parent-teacher Conferences are usually held during the first semester and as needed during the rest of the school year.  These serve as opportunities to communicate each student’s needs and progress and to express any concerns that parents or teachers may have.

COMMUNICATING FINAL AVERAGE INFORMATION

1. Final Average Grade for Grades 4-6.
The final average grade for Grades 4-6 is the average of the year’s work for four marking periods.        It is marked in the last column on the Progress Report Card and is the grade recorded on the student’s permanent record.

2.  Final Average Grades 7-8 only.

 The final grade is the 1st and 2nd semester average .     

5. HONOR ROLL POLICY

The Honor Roll is designed to acknowledge the academic achievement of the students.

Students will be named to the Honor Roll each of the four quarters.  There will be two levels:


  High Honors and  Honors.



High Honor Roll Criteria for Middle School Students

· A student must attain at least a 95-100 average in Core Subjects:

Religion, Mathematics, Social Studies, English Language Arts, Spanish/Reading, Science, 

· A student may not have a grade below 85 in any subject, including Health, Music, Art, Computer and Physical Education.

· An average will not be rounded up.  For example 94.9 does not round up to 95.

Honor Roll Criteria for Middle School Students

· A student must attain at least an 85-94.9 average in Core Subjects: 

Religion, Mathematics, Social Studies, English Language Arts, Spanish/Reading, Science, 

· A student may not have a grade below 80 in any subject, including Health, Music, Art, Computer and Physical Education.

· An average will not be rounded up.  For example 84.9 does not round up to 85.
High Honor Roll Criteria for Grades 4-6
· All A’s and B+’s

· No N’s (needs improvement)in Work Habits or Personal Growth

Honor Roll Criteria for Grades 4-6
· All A’s, B+’s and B’s

· No N’s (needs improvement) in Work Habits or Personal Growth 

6. INTERIM REPORTS IN THE MIDDLE SCHOOL – GRADES 5-8

· In the Middle School we use an interim report form to communicate student performance midway through the marking period.

· The form indicates the letter grade, which the student is currently meriting, as well as any pertinent comments or remarks. 

· The form is to be reviewed by the parent/guardian and returned with the parent signature                   as soon as possible.

NOTE: These reports are meant to facilitate communication between school and home, but are not the only means to use.  Please call us as soon as there is any reason for concern.  We will call you in the same manner.  

7. PROMOTION/RETENTION/GRADUATION
· Promotion refers to the advancement from one grade to the next.

· Retention refers to the repeating of a grade level for a second year.

· Graduation refers to the satisfactory completion of the required course of study in the

   1st through 8th Grades.

Generally, promotion and retention plans are determined by a variety of indicators such as progress reports, standardized test scores, effort, performance and participation in class.  Additionally, the emotional, physical and psychological aspects of the child must also be considered.  In short, no ONE factor will be used to make a decision.

Ordinarily a student is promoted from one level to the next at the end of the school year.  If a child appears to need the benefit of another year at the same level, communication of this need will begin in the second quarter.  The final recommendation would be reached by the third marking period and discussed with the parent/guardian.  The final decision will be put in writing.

In Grades 1-6 a final average of C in the major subjects is seen as an acceptable level of performance for promotion.

At Grades 7-8, a final rating of D in each major subject is required.  Major subjects include Religion, English Language Arts, Mathematics, Science and Social Studies.

Eighth Graders must have a final average of D in each major subject in order to receive a diploma at graduation.  Failure to achieve at this level will result in the student receiving a Certificate of Attendance in place of the Diploma.

Parents will be informed of the possibility of a Certificate of Attendance early in the fourth quarter.  They must acknowledge this written communication by signing and returning the document.

8. AVAILABILITY OF STUDENT RECORDS
· Consistent with the provisions of the "Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act of 1974," official records, files and data directly related to their children are available to parents/legal guardians.

· Such records are confidential and may not be released or made available to persons other than parents and students (over 18) without the written consent of such parents or students.

· Parents may have access to school records upon request.  We ask that you notify the school principal 24 hours in advance, either in writing or by phone.  Arrangements will be made for you to review these records in the school office.

Exceptions to this rule include:


1.  Other professional personnel of the same school who have legitimate


     educational interest.


2.  Officials in a school to which a student is going to transfer.


3.  Authorized representatives of Diocesan and State Education Departments.


4.  Pursuant to court order or subpoena, after notification to parents.


5.  In emergency situations, to those who need information to protect the


     health or safety of the student or other individuals.

Either parent has the right to a child's record.  In separation or divorce cases, access can be granted to both natural parents, unless there is a Court Order to the contrary.  (Diocesan Policy)

18.  DISCIPLINE POLICY
1. INTRODUCTION
The goal of St. Joseph School is to have an atmosphere representative of Catholic values and conducive to learning and to helping students grow in respect, self-confidence and self-discipline.  The purpose of discipline is to maintain this atmosphere.

Discipline must be a joint effort of the school, the parents, and the students.  It is to be administered with consistency and fairness to ensure that each child is given the opportunity to fulfill his/her potential unhindered by the disruptions or infractions of others.

Each teacher will clearly define the expectations of classroom behavior, and all students have the responsibility to abide by the rules.

2. GENERAL UNDERSTANDING

1.  Parental support of the School's discipline policy is seen as essential.


2.  The classroom teacher is the primary disciplinarian.


3.  The Principal will consult with teachers concerning matters which warrant further

                 attention.


4.  Certain situations occur outside of one teacher's responsibility, e.g. lunchroom, 

                 lavatories, etc.  In these matters the Principal will handle a report of a discipline problem.
5.  While school buses are not under the direct supervision of the school, the principal will work with the transportation office personnel to maintain order and safety on the buses for your children.


6.  At times it may be necessary or desirable to require a student/family to seek the 

services of an outside agency.  The principal will maintain a list of suitable agencies or individuals providing service in the area. Continued attendance at the St. Joseph School may be contingent upon the family's compliance with the recommendations of the evaluating agency and/or counselor. 

3. SPECIFIC UNDERSTANDINGS

a.  Students are expected to behave in a responsible and appropriate manner in class.

                 Late arrival to class, unpreparedness:  homework, materials, books, etc., and lack of 

                 respect for the teacher and classmates will not be permitted.

b.  Fighting - including physical and verbal incidents and harassment will not be   permitted.  While we will deal with each incident on an individual basis, it should be understood that an incident of fighting will result in an in-school or out-of-school suspension.  That suspension may be accompanied by a period of disciplinary probation.  This in turn can lead to being asked to leave our school.


c.  Tobacco - The use of tobacco by St. Joseph students on school premises or at school 

                sponsored or affiliated functions is expressly forbidden. Tobacco products are not 

                permitted on school grounds or at school functions.

d. Vandalism to school or the private property of others is unacceptable behavior.


    Restitution in terms of money or time will be required. Contact with law enforcement 

                agencies may be required.  

e. Weapons on School Premises -- No implement that can be construed as a weapon (i.e. knife, large lighter, or the like) will be allowed on school premises. 

According to the seriousness of the offense, the principal will decide on the disciplinary process to be followed.  This may include but is not limited to:   

* in-school discipline

* after-school detention

* in-school suspension

* out-of-school suspension

* expulsion

The principal is authorized to contact the police if, in his/her evaluation of the situation, the student’s action of bringing the weapon or article jeopardized the health and/or safety of other students or school personnel.


f. Profanity will not be tolerated at any time in school.

g. Forgery of parent signatures is unacceptable and will result in detention, loss of a grade 

                and/or parent contact.


h. Plagiarism and other forms of cheating will result in a failing grade on the specific test 

                or project. 

            i. Gum may not be used at any time during the school day.  Candy may be consumed 

               during lunch time only.

4. DRUG AND ALCOHOL ABUSE POLICY
Introduction

1.  The abuse of drugs and alcohol among students in the schools is a reflection of the 

                 abuse of drugs and alcohol among society in general.  The schools of the Diocese of   

                 Rochester accept the responsibility to deal with students in our schools who are 

                 abusing such substances.

2. Each student will be treated as a total person. Administrative regulations will apply

the policy justly, fairly and compassionately.


3.  In any conference called to deal with a case of drug and alcohol abuse, due process 

procedures will be followed. All participants will be afforded an opportunity to present all the pertinent facts in an open manner and to be heard by others.  Student and parent(s) have a right to know the basis of the school's decision.

I.
Selling, Giving or Dealing



Any student in an elementary school of the Diocese of Rochester who is selling, 

                        giving or dealing drugs or alcohol to other students in school or at school-

                        sponsored events is liable to expulsion.  He/she will be immediately placed on 

                        in-school suspension and a conference among student, parent(s) or guardian(s) 

                        and school administrator will be arranged. If the student has not been expelled, 

                        the student will be placed on Disciplinary Probation.  The Principal will impose a 

                        three day in-school suspension period which will include a drug education 

                        program.  A second serious offense against any school rule while on probation

                        will result in expulsion of the student. In addition to counseling, the 

administration will invoke suitable penalties and procedures to ensure the terms of the probation.  Law enforcement contact is mandated in this situation.


II.
Use or Possession



Any student who is in possession of, is detected using, or is under the influence of

                        drugs or alcohol in school or at a school-sponsored event will be placed on 

                        in-school suspension and parent(s) or guardian(s) notified immediately.

                        A conference among principal, parent(s) or guardian(s) and a student will be 

                        arranged.  The Principal will impose a three-day in-school suspension period that 

                        will include a drug education program.

In addition, the family may be required to initiate contact with a designated Drug and Alcohol Counseling Agency for an interview and an evaluation of the student's needs.

The student will be placed on Disciplinary Probation.  A second offense involving drugs or alcohol in any form will result in expulsion.  Law enforcement contact is mandated in situations involving possession.


III.
Drug Paraphernalia



A student who has drug or alcohol paraphernalia in his/her possession in school or

                        at a school-sponsored event will be placed on in-school suspension and parent(s) 

                        or guardian(s) notified immediately of the disciplinary action which includes the 

                        student being placed on Disciplinary Probation.

SPECIAL NOTES
  

In certain situations involving use or possession of a controlled substance, the

                        Principal must notify law enforcement authorities as required by state and local 

regulations. Parent(s) or guardian(s) will be notified immediately that such contact has been made.

5. HARASSMENT AND SEXUAL HARASSMENT

 
Sexual harassment is considered unacceptable behavior at St. Joseph School.  

We define this as unwanted sexual attention from anyone with whom the victim may interact at school.  The behaviors may or may not be intentional. Examples of such behaviors include, but are not limited to:

     
   
Verbal - Unwanted and unwelcome:



*Comments about body parts or rating someone's 

                          body



* Sexual suggestions, threats, or teasing



* Spreading sexual rumors or stories



* Sexual jokes



* Conversations that are too personal



* Comments about sexual orientation

Visual - Unwanted and unwelcome:



* Staring or pointing at a person's body in a way that 

                           is too personal



* Displaying obscene or suggestive material



*Writing a person's name along with sexual remarks

                          suggestions, or drawings



*Making obscene gestures

Physical - Unwanted or unwelcome:



*Grabbing or touching in a sexual way



*Pulling at a person's clothing



*Purposely bumping or brushing against someone



*Kissing or holding a person against his or her will



*Cornering, blocking, standing too close

All students receive instructions during the fall of the year regarding the nature of sexual harassment, as well as the school's policy regarding such behavior.

If a student is the victim of sexually harassing activity he/she should use the following procedure:


1.  If you feel safe doing so, tell the harasser that his/her behavior bothers you and you 

                 want it to stop.


2.  If the behavior continues, go to the principal or a teacher with whom you are 

                 comfortable.  Any complaint will be investigated in a timely fashion.

There are consequences for engaging in this type of behavior.  There will be a written communication to the parent or guardian upon the first offense.   A second offense could lead to suspension, mandatory counseling, or expulsion.  Parents and students need to be advised that individuals are also able to seek redress through law enforcement agencies and/or an attorney.

It is expected that all those involved with sexual harassment investigations will protect the confidentiality of all information relating to the case.

6. CONSEQUENCES OF MISBEHAVIOR
If misbehavior is chronic or severe, measures will be taken to provide a consequence in keeping with the offense.  

A. Consequences may include, but are not limited to the following categories:

· Reprimands /tasks set by the individual teacher.

· Lunch Detention - Loss of group or recess time. 

· After School Detention - Detaining a student after hours for a specific amount of time, usually one hour.

· In School Suspension - Removal of a student from regular classroom activities and contact with classmates.

· Disciplinary Probation - Student is restricted from all extra curricular school activities for a 

specific amount of time.  This usually accompanies an out of school 

suspension and may accompany an in school suspension. It may also be 

used independently.

· Out of School Suspension - One or more days in which the student is restricted from attending school, classes or extra curricular activities.

· Expulsion - Removal of the student from St. Joseph School.

B. SUSPENSION

Short-term suspension is the responsibility of the Principal.  This action will be taken when, in the judgment of the Principal, there has occurred a serious infraction of the school's policy, and/or when a student's behavior is detrimental to a constructive learning atmosphere.
Generally this will involve an in-school suspension.  This will mean that the student will report to school, and will be responsible for all schoolwork, but will not be allowed access to their classroom or classmates.  They will complete the day in isolation, under the supervision of the Principal.

Parents will always receive written notification of a suspension prior to it being served.  A 

conference with the parent and Principal may be necessary before the student may return to school.

A student under suspension of any kind may not take part in any extra-curricular activities, including but not limited to sports and social events.

Students on suspension may not take part in activities such as dress-down days.

C.  OUT OF SCHOOL SUSPENSION
This is a serious consequence and is considered the last step before expulsion.  A student would be restricted from attending school up to 5 days. 

Written parent notification must be given and acknowledged before this can take place. 

A conference with the principal, parent/guardian and student must take place before the student may resume classes.

As with an in school suspensions, the student will be liable for all classwork and homework assignments.  The student may not participate in any extracurricular activities. 

D. DISCIPLINARY PROBATION

     Disciplinary Probation is intended to help the student realize that he/she must take 

                 responsibility for his/her behavior and to help the student move toward greater self      

                 discipline.  A student on Disciplinary Probation is not allowed to participate in school 

                 privileges such as dress down days, or extra curricular activities such as ski club, or 

                 school dances.

10. EXPULSION
The expulsion of a child from a Catholic school is a serious punishment, which will be invoked rarely and then only as a last resort.  The Principal will be expected to use every means available to discover the cause of the problem and should exhaust all appropriate remedies such as referral to a guidance clinic or other appropriate family support services.  If expulsion is necessary, every effort will be made for appropriate placement.


     Terms of expulsion from attendance include:


     a.    A student who is insubordinate or disorderly, or whose conduct endangers the 

                       safety, morals, health and welfare of others.


     b.
A student whose physical or mental condition endangers the health, safety or 

                       morals of himself/herself or of other minors.

     Reports recording the incident(s) leading to the expulsion and the communication(s) 

                 relative to the decision are kept in the files of the local school.

                 Consultation will be made by the Principal with the General Education Office when 

                 due process notice has been given that expulsion is pending.


     Parents have access to due process and will be notified that they have a right to appeal 

                 an expulsion.  This may be done through the Diocesan Office, vis-a-vis a 

                 Superintendent's Conference.

            19.  SCHOOL ACTIVITIES AND CLUBS
The Morning Program is held on Friday throughout the school year.  Morning Program begins at 8:50 in the gym.  This is usually attended by preschool – Grade 2. Other classes may attend at special times.
National Junior Honor Society is open to 7th and 8th graders on the basis of academics and service.

Students in this club have an opportunity to participate in special service activities outside of school.

Ski Club is open to all students in the Middle School who would like to participate.

The school Yearbook Club is usually a group of 8th graders who put together special school memories for the year.
                       Note:  Our Code of Conduct does apply to all school sponsored activities.

Some 7th and 8th graders have the opportunity to participate in Modified Sports through the Auburn School District.  All sports equipment is stored in the Business Office until the end of the school day.

Grade 8 Instrumental music students have the opportunity to participate in the Auburn High School Marching Band.

3
1


