Name: Teaching History.pptx
Language: en
Creator: Ania
Creation date: 
Last modification: 2018-01-23
MIME type: application/vnd.openxmlformats-officedocument.presentationml.presentation

Teaching History
Janet Farrall
SASOSE 2013 Conference







1


AITSL STANDARDS
1.2 Understand how students learn
3.1 Establishing challenging learning goals
3.4 Select and use resources





2


History
 The past is a foreign country: they do things differently there 
	(L. P. Hartley in The Go-Between)






3


Learning Intention
	Participants will be able to know and understand and be able to construct the sources analyses tasks embedded in the new Australian History curriculum
	




4


AC Historical Understandings
Use of evidence
Continuity and change
Cause and effect
Significance
Multiple Perspectives
Empathy
Contestability






5
All of these understandings can be addressed through sources analysis

Historical Skills
Chronology, terms and concepts
Historical questions and research
Analysis and use of sources
Perspectives and interpretations
Explanation and communication






6


Historical Sources: Primary and Secondary

What is a primary source?
What is a secondary source?
What is the value of each type of source?
Popular Misconception:
A primary source is more useful than a secondary source because it is more....?






7
Refer to hand-out Wolfson and Aylett






John Michael Skipper, Corroboree, 1840
Imagine you are one of the people in this colonial painting below. Construct a See, Think, Wonder as that character.

8






Tjikalyi Colin, a Pitjantjatjara girl, collecting firewood, Ernabella, South Australia, ca. 1946
9

CRITICAL THINKING: Understanding Sources

Porcupine Method (Kitchen Diagram)


Algorithm:
	Left to right
	Bottom to top,
	Who’s doing what?
	Look at the lot



		

 







10



Porcupine Method (Abbott 1997:27)




Critical Thinking: Interrogating Sources
4Ws: 
Who created the source?
When was the source created?
Why was it created?
What type of source is it?


		

 







12
(Is it a primary or secondary source or both? Why?)
Is it primary or secondary or both?
What type or form is the source? Is it a creative work?

 Critical Thinking: Interrogating Sources: The 9 Generic Questions
Who created the source?
When was the source created? 
Why was it created?
What type or form is the source? 
Who was its intended audience? 
What can we learn from this source? 
Facts
opinions
attitudes
What is the tone of the source?
Is the source private or public in origin
Is something missing from the source?

		

 







13


CRITICAL THINKING: Interrogating Sources
Who do you think took the photo: a missionary, a tourist, a government official, a journalist?
Why do you think the photographer took this photo?
What evidence is there of white settlement in the photo?
Is the photo staged? 
Do you think the aboriginal girl is happy?
What do you think the two women are doing in this photograph? 
What evidence in the photograph tells us that Aboriginal people lived a simple life?
In what ways is the aboriginal girl’s life like yours? In what ways is it different?
What conclusions about  can you draw about life for aboriginal people in the bush 70 years ago?





14







Source2 : Jacob Stengle, a direct descendant of the Ngarrindjeri nation, created this
painting, entitled, Colebrook Home - The Stolen Generation. He was a former
Colebrook resident.

15

CRITICAL THINKING: Interpreting Sources
Porcupine method
4 W Questions
Interpreting and analysing a source
Source: UNISA, 1997, New Outlook, SA, UNISA




16
Left to right, Bottom to top, Who’s doing what? Look at the lot.
Back Up: Uses and Limitations

CRITICAL THINKING Revised Bloom’s Taxonomy
 Remembering
 Understanding
 Applying
 Analysing
 Evaluating
 Creating









17
Little Book

Sources Analysis
Knowledge and comprehension (1)
Knowledge and comprehension (2)
Drawing conclusions (3)
Analysis: similarities and differences 							(4)
Analysis: uses and limitations (4)
Evaluation of a proposition (6)





CRITICAL THINKING: Analysing Sources
Similarities and Differences
In what ways are the girls in the sources the same?
In what ways are they different?
What do the sources reveal about changes in the lives of indigenous people?





19


CRITICAL THINKING: Evaluating Sources
Uses and Limitations of sources
Is a photo more useful than a creative work like a painting?
What are the benefits and limitations of each source?





20


CRITICAL THINKING: Evaluating Sources
Evaluating Propositions
	“Settlement in Australia was a disaster for indigenous people.” Do you agree? Argue your case.




21


CRITICAL THINKING: Summing Up: Interrogation of Sources
What conclusions can we draw from the evidence
To what extent is one source similar to another?
What makes evidence useful to historians, for example, personal evidence?
What are the limitations of various sources
Is one form of evidence more reliable than the others?





22









CRITICAL THINKERS?
Ned Kelly took a stand for truth and justice and changed Australia forever
Ned Kelly was a hero. 
The things he did since he was a child was always for the greater good. He had even risked his life to save the life of another boy when he was a child. The man had goodness running through his veins his entire life and the idea that someone would label him a villain is ridiculous





CRITICAL THINKERS? 
A fugitive Australian rebel, he repeatedly embarrasses and evades the authorities, in the process becoming an icon of resistance and folk hero. WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange is the Ned Kelly of the digital age.   Bryce Lowry, The Victor Harbor Times, Dec 7, 2010





CRITICAL THINKERS? 

	“The evidence of his life leads inexorably to one conclusion: Ned Kelly is Australia's first yob.”

Christopher Bantick, The Age, October 24, 2001.






CRITICAL THINKERS? 

Kelly was a dog of a man........ no more than a cold-blooded killer

David Penberthy, The Advertiser, January 18 2013






CRITICAL THINKERS? 
"There is very little difference between Ned Kelly and Carl Williams. They were both multiple murderers who had no regard for anyone and who ended up dying violent deaths.“

Police Association Secretary, Greg Davies 
Herald Sun, 9 November, 2011




CRITICAL THINKERS? 
	“ned kelly is a hero he did save a young boy and did stand up for what was wrong he was not a villian even tho he robbed and shot police he is still a hero.”

p.s ned kelly is my great great grandfather







29

GLOSSARY of Terms & Approaches
Primary and secondary evidence
Authentic
4 Ws: Who, When, Why? What?
NOP: Nature, Origin, Purpose
Interpreting
Drawing conclusions
Analysing
Evaluating
Bias
Reliability
Representativeness
3 Rs: Relevance, Reliability and Representativeness
	




30


Teaching History: Models
Janet Farrall
2011







31


Curriculum Models
Blooms Taxonomy
Six Hat Thinking
Thinkers Keys
Coil’s Lateral Thinking Questions
Understanding by Design
Williams







32


RESOURCES


Visible Thinking http://www.old-pz.gse.harvard.edu/vt/VisibleThinking_html_files/01_VisibleThinkingInAction/01a_VTInAction.html  (Date Accessed 21-3-13)

Wolfson, R and Aylett, J. F.,1988,  Examining the Evidence, GB, Edward Arnold






33


SOURCES
Carroll, B., 1974, The Australian Poster Album, Melbourne, Sun Books.
 
Dore,” Russian Cartoon 1854” in Fine Art America, 2013 http://fineartamerica.com/featured/dore-russian-cartoon-1854-granger.html Date Accessed 20/2/2013
 
In Defence of Marxism, 2005, http://www.marxist.com/women-and-the-crisis-of-capitalism.htm Date Accessed 20/2/2013
 
The Russian Poster, Moscow 2001
 
Russian Social Pyramid in Alpha History 2013, http://alphahistory.com/russianrevolution/russian-revolution-graphics/
Date Accessed 2013
 
The Soviet Political Poster, Moscow, 2001 
“Tjikalyi Colin, a Pitjantjatjara girl, collecting firewood, Ernabella, South Australia, ca. 1946, 2 [picture]” in Central Australia photograph album [picture] between 1930 and 1950, nla.pic-vn4805417, Date accessed 20/2/2013

UNISA, 1997, New Outlook, SA, UNISA.






34







Dore,” Russian Cartoon 1854” in Fine Art America, 2013 http://fineartamerica.com/featured/dore-russian-cartoon-1854-granger.html Date Accessed 20/2/2013

35






Russian Social Pyramid in Alpha History 2013, http://alphahistory.com/russianrevolution/russian-revolution-graphics/
Date Accessed 2013

36

Year 9 History: Russian Cartoons Group Work activity.
The Artist’s View: The Gamblers and The Cartoonist’s view: Russian Civilisation in Condon, C, 1990, The Nineteenth Century World, Melbourne, MacMillan.

Immersion activities:
	4 w’s
	“Porcupine” every detail in each cartoon.

Oral Group work:
What do you think cartoonists set out to do?

2. How is a political cartoon different from an ordinary cartoon?

3. In what ways are the cartoons similar?

4. In what ways are they different?

5. What conclusion can be drawn from the cartoons about the plight of the lower classes in Russian Society during the 19th C? Consider each one in turn.

6. In what ways are the cartoons helpful for historians wishing to understand the nature of society in Russia during the 19th C?

7. What are their limitations for historians wishing to understand the nature of society in Russia during the 19th C?

8. Do you think the cartoonists in each case approve or disapprove of the way the lower classes are treated? Give reasons to support you point of view.

JEF/9H/2005










In Defence of Marxism, 2005, http://www.marxist.com/women-and-the-crisis-of-capitalism.htm Date accessed 20/2/2013

38






Carroll, B., 1974, The Australian Poster Album, Melbourne, Sun Books.

39






Carroll, B., 1974, The Australian Poster Album, Melbourne, Sun Books.

40






Red Army Warrior. Please Help The Soviet Political Poster, Moscow, 2001 
41






The Russian Poster, Moscow 2001

42

Society and Culture Under Stalin
Questions based on 1989 Mid-year exam paper.
Who were the “exploiting classes” referred to in Source 2?  (2)						 			 
What roles is Stalin portrayed as playing in Source 3?           (2)							  			 
What conclusions can be drawn from Source 4 about the nature of Stalin’s regime?					                                            (2)

How far do the ideas expressed in Source 1 support those portrayed in Source 3?				                                                                            (4)
How reliable is Source 2 as evidence of the nature of Stalin’s regime?    
		In your answer consider
who produced the source, 
 the language used,
 the motive of the producer,
 the type of source.
             Make sure you write a synthesising sentence                   (5)				
6.   Use the sources to examine the following proposition: “Stalin brought more harm than good to the Soviet Union”        (Two paragraphs.)                     (5)

Empathy Question:
You are a prisoner in a Russian gulag and you have just been told of Stalin’s death. Write a letter to your family that explains why you are grieving for Stalin when he imprisoned you for a minor crime.









The Soviet Political Poster, Moscow, 2001 

44

Who discovered Australia?
 Captain Cook
 Europeans
 Aboriginals
 Captain Cool
 Caption Kook
 God







EXIT CARD: RIQ
 3 Recalls
 2 Insights (I used to 	think….but now I think)
 1 Question






46



