At dusk the cars begin to congregate. The drivers, kids in their teens, meet and greet and happily insult one another. A few couples, going steady, may pair off. There is a high school dance, but there is also the lure of the main street to cruise up and down, exchanging pleasantries, looking for dates, for excitement, an impromptu race, even a little danger. Every radio in town is tuned in to Wolfman Jack with his line of eerie patter and all the latest hits—"Sixteen Candles," "The Book of Love"...It is early in the fall of 1962, somewhere in northern California.

Two of the boys, Curt Henderson and Steve Bolander, headed East to college, are uneasy at the prospect. John Milner, champion drag racer, is twenty-two—old enough to know he's headed nowhere, except up to the neon-lighted circle of Mel's Drive-In and perhaps down to the stillness of the automobile graveyard at the edge of town. Those are roughly the perimeters of George Lucas's American Graffiti, which examines that much of America as it lives for about twelve hours, from an evening to the following morning.

A lot happens. Steve (Ronny Howard) breaks up and makes up with Curt's sister Laurie (Cindy Williams). A younger boy, Terry, (Charlie Martin Smith) borrows Steve's Chevy, picks up a dizzy blonde (Candy Clark) for a night of horrendous misadventures, all greatly to her pleasure.

John (Paul Le Mat) enters the climactic drag race of his career. Curt (Richard Dreyfuss), the local intellectual, is almost inducted into the Pharaohs, the town gang. But Curt is following a vision, an elusive girl in a white Thunderbird who may have whispered "I love you." He never finds her. But when, in the morning, he takes off (via Magic Carpet Airlines), a white T-bird heads East on the road below. It is the only car we ever see leaving town.

American Graffiti exists not so much in its individual stories as in its orchestration of many stories, its sense of time and place. Although it is full of the material of fashionable nostalgia, it never exploits nostalgia. In its feeling for movement and music and the vitality of the night—and even in its vision in white—it is oddly closer to some early Fellini than to the recent American past of, say, The Last Picture Show or Summer of '42.

It is a very good movie, funny, tough, unsentimental. It is full of marvelous performances from actors (especially Candy Clark, Richard Dreyfuss, and Cindy Williams) hardly known for previous screen credits. But for me its excitement comes at least partly from its indication of what may be a major new career.

George Lucas, twenty-eight years old, has made one previous feature. It is a good science fiction film, THX 1138, about a closed, tranquilized future society, controlled by mysterious broadcast voices, and from which there is almost no escape. For all its apparent differences, American Graffiti really presents the obverse of that world—now beneficent, familiar; but also closed, tuned in to mysterious voices, and offering almost no means of escape.

The ways in which they are like each other are fascinating, and very much in keeping with the kinds of continuity the best directors have sustained from film to film. And somehow the persistence of an idea, reshaped and re-examined, gives me even greater joy than the specific pleasures of American Graffiti.

American Graffiti opened yesterday at the Sutton Theater.