The best scene in Barry Jenkins’s Moonlight is also its longest. It depicts two men who, in their boyhood days, shared both a sexual experience and a violent episode and meet again after years apart at a close-to-empty diner, hesitantly exchanging information about the lives they’ve lived in the interim. Chiron (Trevante Rhodes) grits through his grillz that, after a stint in juvenile detention, he’s “trappin’”; Kevin (André Holland) talks of a marriage, kids, and an amiable divorce. Throughout, Jenkins negotiates a hybrid of the patient, real-time conversational moments recognizable in Andrew Haigh and Richard Linklater’s films, and the aesthetic sensualism favored by Wong Kar-wai and Pedro Almodóvar. It’s the one occasion here that Jenkins gets that balance just right, allowing for both an interpersonal intimacy with his characters and a sensory understanding of their unspoken desires.

The rest of Moonlight, however, is burdened with not only setting up the dramatic weight of this particular encounter, but also developing the narrative leading toward another one: Chiron’s reunion with his drug-addicted mother, Paula (Naomie Harris). Because Jenkins has tasked himself with a story that spans three loosely defined eras (Chiron as a child, a high school-aged student, and an adult) and concerns itself equally with two complex relationships (Chiron and his mother, and Chiron and Kevin), much of the film becomes little more than a montage of life-shaping moments.

Collectively, these scenes register as histrionic because there are only broad strokes to contextualize them. At one point, a neighborhood drug dealer, Juan (Mahershala Ali), who comes to mentor a young Chiron (Alex Hibbert) imparts words of wisdom to the boy, but scenes later he’s gone, and precisely what his interest was in Chiron is left unclear. Likewise, the principal characters—from Chiron’s mother to Chiron himself—are defined almost exclusively by their roles in conflicts and reconciliations. Harris in particular has to somehow create a believable arc from Paula’s repeated, drug-addled berating and one late scene that depicts the mother soberly crying as she expresses her remorse. Chiron, meanwhile, is never, at least until the last section of the film, much more than the sum of his interactions with other people.